# Activity 3.1 - Regular languages

Reference for math symbols:
https://www.overleaf.com/learn/latex/List_of_Greek_letters_and_math_symbols

## Names:

- Mariel Gómez, A01275607
- Santiago Rodríguez, A01025232

## Exercises:

1. Give a recursive definition of the set of strings over $\{a, b\}$ that contain at least one $b$ and have an even number of $a$’s before the first $b$. For example: $aab$, $bab$ and $aaaabbabababa$ are in the set,but $abb$, $aaab$ and $aa$ are not

_**SOLUTION:**_

Let $L$ be the set of strings over $\{a, b\}$ that contain at least one $b$ and have an even number of $a$’s before the first $b$.

**I. Basis**: $b \in L$

**II. Recursive step**: If $u \in L$, then $ua, ub, aau \in L$

**III. Closure**: A string $u \in L$ only if it can be obtained from the basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.

2. Let $X = \{aa, bb\}$ and $Y = \{\lambda, b, ab\}$.

a. List the strings in set $XY$

| #   | string | #   | string | #   | string |
| --- | ------ | --- | ------ | --- | ------ |
| 1   | aa     | 2   | bb     | 3   | aab    |
| 4   | bbb    | 5   | aaab   | 6   | bbab   |

b. How many strings of length 6 are there in $X^*$?
8

c. List the strings in set $Y^*$ of length three or less

| #   | string     | #   | string | #   | string |
| --- | ---------- | --- | ------ | --- | ------ |
| 1   | b          | 2   | bb     | 3   | bbb    |
| 4   | bab        | 5   | ab     | 6   | abb    |
| 7   | $ \lambda$ |     |        |     |

d. List the strings in set $X^* Y^*$ of length four or less

| #   | string | #   | string | #   | string     |
| --- | ------ | --- | ------ | --- | ---------- |
| 1   | aa     | 2   | bb     | 3   | aaaa       |
| 4   | bbbb   | 5   | aabb   | 6   | bbaa       |
| 7   | aab    | 8   | aaab   | 9   | bbb        |
| 10  | bbab   | 11  | abbb   | 12  | babb       |
| 13  | b      | 14  | ab     | 15  | bab        |
| 16  | abb    | 17  | abab   | 18  | $ \lambda$ |

3. Give a recursive definition of the set $\{ a^ib^j | 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i\}$

_**SOLUTION:**_

Let $L$ be the set $\{ a^ib^j | 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ 2i\}$

**I. Basis**: $\lambda \in L$

**II. Recursive Step**: If $u \in L$, $aub, aubb \in L$

**III. Closure**: A string $u \in L$ only if it can be obtained from the basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.

4. Let $L$ be the set of strings over $\{a, b\}$ generated by the recursive definition

**I. Basis:** $b \in L$

**II. Recursive Step**: If $u \in L$ then $ub \in L$, $uab \in L$, $uba \in
L$ and $bua \in L$

**III. Closure**: A string $u \in L$ only if it can be obtained from the
basis using a finite number of applications of the recursive step.

**a.** List the elements in the sets $L_0, L_1, L_2$
$L_0 = \{b\}$
$L_1 = \{bb, bab, bba \}$
$L_2 = \{bbb, bbab, bbba, babb, babab, babba, bbaba, bbaab, bbbaa\}$

**b.** Is the string $bbaaba$ in $L$? If so, trace how it is produced.
If not, explain why not.

The string $bbaaba$ is not in $L$. This is because, given the basis and recursive step, the number of $b$ in the string is always greater than the number of $a$. This is because we start with one $b$, and all operations add one $b$, but only one or none $a$s.

**c.** Is the string $bbaaaabb$ in $L$? If so, trace how it is produced.
If not, explain why not.

The string $bbaaaabb$ is not in $L$. This is because, given the basis and recursive step, the number of $b$ in the string is always greater than the number of $a$. This is because we start with one $b$, and all operations add one $b$, but only one or none $a$s.

5. Prove, using induction on the length of a string, that $(w^R)^R = w$ for all string $w \in \Sigma$

_**SOLUTION:**_

Using $(uv)^R=v^Ru^R$ and that $a^R=a$ when $len(a) = 1$.

**I. Basis**: We know from the definition of the reversal operator that $\lambda^R=\lambda$. If $w = \lambda$, then $(w^R)^R=(\lambda^R)^R=\lambda^R=\lambda$.

**II. Inductive Hypothesis**: If $w=m$, it holds that $(m^R)^R = m$.

**III. Inductive Step**: For $am$ where $len(a) = 1$.

$((am)^R)^R = am$
$(m^Ra^R)^R = am$
$(m^Ra)^R = am$
$a^R(m^R)^R = am$
$a(m^R)^R = am$
$am = am$
$\square$
